---
layout: page
title: Julius Caesar
---


# Women


Using a tool called WordHoard, we can view the words that appear in Julius
Caesar more or less than would be expected, compared to the rest of
Shakespeare's plays.  The words in black appear more frequently in Julius Caesar
than in other plays; words in grey appear less frequently.

It's not surprising that words like "Roman" and "Ides" are more prevalent in
this play, that's something that we could easily have guessed, but this word
cloud can show us other differences that may not be as obvious to the naked eye.

We can see from this word cloud that the words "she" and "her" appear a lot less
in Julius Caesar than in Shakespeare's other plays. But we know that there are
female characters in this play, Calphurnia and Portia. So what does this
decrease in usage tell us about the role of women in this play? Are they
developed as characters in their own right or are they defined solely by the men
to whom they are married?

To give us some context, in the diagram below we can see how often the word
"she" comes up in Julius Caesar, Hamlet, Macbeth and Othello respectively.

These plots don't only show how often the word "she" comes up in the four plays,
but also when.  Each vertical line is one occurrence of the word, and where it
appears in the bar tells us how far in to the play the word is spoken. For
example, we can see that "she" appears approximately a third of the way through
Julius Caesar and another few times about three quarters of the way through. In
comparison, this same word occurs 47 times in Macbeth, and is spread relatively
evenly throughout the play.

The absence of masculine pronouns (e.g. he, him, and his) from the word cloud
above tells us that they are used a "normal" amount in Julius Caesar compared to
Shakespeare's other plays.  That doesn't tell us much, but when we compare
masculine and feminine pronouns in Julius Caesar, this huge discrepancy becomes
even more apparent.
